README.md, before:

# Design patterns notebook
![Alt text](banner.jpg?raw=true "Banner")
These are my notes I took from the 'Head first design patterns' book and [Christopher Okhravi](https://www.youtube.com/c/ChristopherOkhravi) YouTube videos. 
## What is meant by design patterns?  
Design patterns are programming language independent strategies for solving a common problem. That means a design pattern represents an idea, not a particular implementation. By using design patterns, you can make your code more flexible, reusable, and maintainable.    
### Patterns
0. [the strategy Pattern](#the-Strategy-Pattern)
1. [the Observer Pattern](#the-Observer-Pattern)
2. [the Decorator Pattern](#the-Decorator-Pattern)
3. [the Factory Pattern](#the-Factory-Pattern)
4. [the Singleton Pattern](#the-Singleton-Pattern)
5. [the Command Pattern](#the-Command-Pattern)
6. [the Adapter and Facade Patterns](#the-Adapter-and-Facade-Patterns)
7. [the Template Method Pattern](#the-Template-Method-Pattern)
8. [the Iterator and Composite Patterns](#the-Iterator-and-Composite-Patterns)
9. [the State Pattern](#the-State-Pattern)
10. [the Proxy Pattern](#the-Proxy-Pattern)
11. [Compound Patterns](#Compound-Patterns)
12. [Better Living with Patterns](#Better-Living-with-Patterns)
13. [Leftover Patterns](#Leftover-Patterns)

## the Strategy Pattern  
The Strategy Pattern defines a family of algorithms, encapsulates each one, and makes them interchangeable. Strategy lets the algorithm vary independently clients that use it.  
* A localized update to the super class can cause a non local side effect.  
Example: Imagine having a superclass called `Duck` from which all other duck types inherit. to this point everything looks fine but when we have a `fly()` method and a subclass called `rubber ducks` there will be a problem: rubber ducks don't fly !).    

    → We can extract the methodes that make the diffrence and make the subclasses override them, But in a bigger scale it will be a mess. No matter how well you design your application, over time an application must grow and change or it will die.    
    → The better solution is to `take what varies and encapsulate them so it won't affect the rest of the code.`

`Favor composition over inheritance`    
`Program to an interface, not an implementation.`  
`The diffrent behaviors will live in a seperate class (AKA interface)`  

## the Observer Pattern  
The Observer Pattern defines a one-to-many dependency between objects so that when one object changes state, all of its dependents are notified and updated automatically.

* This pattern have 2 elements: `the subject` & `the observers`. These two have a publisher-subscribers relationship.  
Example: You subscribe to a newspaper; you notify them that you want to be a subscriber and pay them; so the newspaper (aka the publisher) will send you newspaper as long as you don't unsubscribe; in other words if you want to unsubscribe you need to notify the publisher.    
    → When the state of one object changes, all of its dependents are notified.  
`Strive for loosely coupled designs between objects that interact.`  
`Loosely coupled designs allow us to build flexible OO systems that can handle change because they minimize the interdependency between objects.`

## the Decorator Pattern  
The Decorator Pattern attaches additional responsibilities to an object dynamically. Decorators provide a flexible alternative to subclassing for extending functionality.  

Example: You have a superclass that have a hundreds of subclasses that are nearly the same (they have a 1% diffrence between each other).  
    → We need to allow classes to be easily extended to incorporate new behavior without modifying existing code But how ? The answer is to wrap the subclass with decorators.  
`Classes should be open for extension, but closed for modification` 

## the Factory Pattern  
The Factory Method Pattern defines an interface for creating an object, but lets subclasses decide which class to instantiate. Factory Method lets a class defer instantiation to subclasses.  

Example: Imagine you have a class to create pizzas that have bunch of `If` statements inside, we take those lines of code and place them inside another subclass (this class is what we call a `Factory` so we can say that factories handle the details of object creation) and call it inside our class. This will abstract the code and make it easier to read and understand.  
`Depend upon abstractions. Do not depend upon concrete classes`  
### the `abstract` Factory Pattern  
The Abstract Factory Pattern provides an interface for creating families of related or dependent objects without specifying their concrete classes.  

* We’ve certainly seen that Abstract Factory allows a client to use an abstract interface to create a set of related products without knowing (or caring) about the concrete products that are actually produced. In this way, the client is decoupled from any of the specifics of the concrete products. Abstract Factory relies on object composition: object creation is implemented in methods exposed in the factory interface.    

## the Singleton Pattern    
The Singleton Pattern ensures 2 things to happen:  
* a class that has only one instance.  
* that class should provide a global point of access to it.  

`Classes should be open for extension but closed for modification`  
Note: No one really use this pattern anymore but it's a good thing to know about it.  

## the Command Pattern  
The Command Pattern encapsulates a request as an object, thereby letting you parameterize other objects with different requests, queue or log requests, and support undoable operations.  
* When you need to decouple an object making requests from the objects that know how to perform the requests, use the Command Pattern.  
* A Command object is at the center of this decoupling and encapsulates a receiver with an action (or set of actions).  
* An invoker makes a request of a Command object by calling its `execute()` method, which invokes those actions on the receiver.  
* Invokers can be parameterized with Commands, even dynamically at runtime.  

## the Adapter and Facade Patterns  
the two patterns changes an interface, the Adapter to convert and the Facade to unify and simplify.  
### the Adapter Pattern  
The Adapter Pattern converts the interface of a class into another interface the clients expect. Adapter lets classes work together that couldn’t otherwise because of incompatible interfaces.  
* We could use several adapters, each converting a different backend set of classes. Or, we could add new implementations after the fact, as long as they adhere to the Target interface.  
* There are actually two kinds of adapters: `object` adapters and `class` adapters.  
    → Object adapters and class adapters use two different means of adapting the adaptee (composition versus inheritance).  
### the Facade Pattern  
The Facade Pattern provides a unified interface to a set of interfaces in a subsytem. Facade defines a higherlevel interface that makes the subsystem easier to use.  
`Principle of Least Knowledge - talk only to your immediate friends`

Commit message:

Adding the Template Method pattern

README.md, after:

# Design patterns notebook
![Alt text](banner.jpg?raw=true "Banner")
These are my notes I took from the 'Head first design patterns' book and [Christopher Okhravi](https://www.youtube.com/c/ChristopherOkhravi) YouTube videos. 
## What is meant by design patterns?  
Design patterns are programming language independent strategies for solving a common problem. That means a design pattern represents an idea, not a particular implementation. By using design patterns, you can make your code more flexible, reusable, and maintainable.    
### Patterns
0. [the strategy Pattern](#the-Strategy-Pattern)
1. [the Observer Pattern](#the-Observer-Pattern)
2. [the Decorator Pattern](#the-Decorator-Pattern)
3. [the Factory Pattern](#the-Factory-Pattern)
4. [the Singleton Pattern](#the-Singleton-Pattern)
5. [the Command Pattern](#the-Command-Pattern)
6. [the Adapter and Facade Patterns](#the-Adapter-and-Facade-Patterns)
7. [the Template Method Pattern](#the-Template-Method-Pattern)
8. [the Iterator and Composite Patterns](#the-Iterator-and-Composite-Patterns)
9. [the State Pattern](#the-State-Pattern)
10. [the Proxy Pattern](#the-Proxy-Pattern)
11. [Compound Patterns](#Compound-Patterns)
12. [Better Living with Patterns](#Better-Living-with-Patterns)
13. [Leftover Patterns](#Leftover-Patterns)

## the Strategy Pattern  
The Strategy Pattern defines a family of algorithms, encapsulates each one, and makes them interchangeable. Strategy lets the algorithm vary independently clients that use it.  
* A localized update to the super class can cause a non local side effect.  
Example: Imagine having a superclass called `Duck` from which all other duck types inherit. to this point everything looks fine but when we have a `fly()` method and a subclass called `rubber ducks` there will be a problem: rubber ducks don't fly !).    

    → We can extract the methodes that make the diffrence and make the subclasses override them, But in a bigger scale it will be a mess. No matter how well you design your application, over time an application must grow and change or it will die.    
    → The better solution is to `take what varies and encapsulate them so it won't affect the rest of the code.`

`Favor composition over inheritance`    
`Program to an interface, not an implementation.`  
`The diffrent behaviors will live in a seperate class (AKA interface)`  

## the Observer Pattern  
The Observer Pattern defines a one-to-many dependency between objects so that when one object changes state, all of its dependents are notified and updated automatically.

* This pattern have 2 elements: `the subject` & `the observers`. These two have a publisher-subscribers relationship.  
Example: You subscribe to a newspaper; you notify them that you want to be a subscriber and pay them; so the newspaper (aka the publisher) will send you newspaper as long as you don't unsubscribe; in other words if you want to unsubscribe you need to notify the publisher.    
    → When the state of one object changes, all of its dependents are notified.  
`Strive for loosely coupled designs between objects that interact.`  
`Loosely coupled designs allow us to build flexible OO systems that can handle change because they minimize the interdependency between objects.`

## the Decorator Pattern  
The Decorator Pattern attaches additional responsibilities to an object dynamically. Decorators provide a flexible alternative to subclassing for extending functionality.  

Example: You have a superclass that have a hundreds of subclasses that are nearly the same (they have a 1% diffrence between each other).  
    → We need to allow classes to be easily extended to incorporate new behavior without modifying existing code But how ? The answer is to wrap the subclass with decorators.  
`Classes should be open for extension, but closed for modification` 

## the Factory Pattern  
The Factory Method Pattern defines an interface for creating an object, but lets subclasses decide which class to instantiate. Factory Method lets a class defer instantiation to subclasses.  

Example: Imagine you have a class to create pizzas that have bunch of `If` statements inside, we take those lines of code and place them inside another subclass (this class is what we call a `Factory` so we can say that factories handle the details of object creation) and call it inside our class. This will abstract the code and make it easier to read and understand.  
`Depend upon abstractions. Do not depend upon concrete classes`  
### the `abstract` Factory Pattern  
The Abstract Factory Pattern provides an interface for creating families of related or dependent objects without specifying their concrete classes.  

* We’ve certainly seen that Abstract Factory allows a client to use an abstract interface to create a set of related products without knowing (or caring) about the concrete products that are actually produced. In this way, the client is decoupled from any of the specifics of the concrete products. Abstract Factory relies on object composition: object creation is implemented in methods exposed in the factory interface.    

## the Singleton Pattern    
The Singleton Pattern ensures 2 things to happen:  
* a class that has only one instance.  
* that class should provide a global point of access to it.  

`Classes should be open for extension but closed for modification`  
Note: No one really use this pattern anymore but it's a good thing to know about it.  

## the Command Pattern  
The Command Pattern encapsulates a request as an object, thereby letting you parameterize other objects with different requests, queue or log requests, and support undoable operations.  
* When you need to decouple an object making requests from the objects that know how to perform the requests, use the Command Pattern.  
* A Command object is at the center of this decoupling and encapsulates a receiver with an action (or set of actions).  
* An invoker makes a request of a Command object by calling its `execute()` method, which invokes those actions on the receiver.  
* Invokers can be parameterized with Commands, even dynamically at runtime.  

## the Adapter and Facade Patterns  
the two patterns changes an interface, the Adapter to convert and the Facade to unify and simplify.  
### the Adapter Pattern  
The Adapter Pattern converts the interface of a class into another interface the clients expect. Adapter lets classes work together that couldn’t otherwise because of incompatible interfaces.  
* We could use several adapters, each converting a different backend set of classes. Or, we could add new implementations after the fact, as long as they adhere to the Target interface.  
* There are actually two kinds of adapters: `object` adapters and `class` adapters.  
    → Object adapters and class adapters use two different means of adapting the adaptee (composition versus inheritance).  
### the Facade Pattern  
The Facade Pattern provides a unified interface to a set of interfaces in a subsytem. Facade defines a higherlevel interface that makes the subsystem easier to use.  
`Principle of Least Knowledge - talk only to your immediate friends`  
## the Template Method Pattern  
The Template Method Pattern defines the skeleton of an algorithm in a method, deferring some steps to subclasses. Template Method lets subclasses redefine certain steps of an algorithm without changing the algorithm’s structure.  
* The template method makes use of the `primitiveOperations` to implement an algorithm. It is decoupled from the actual implementation of these operations.  
`The Hollywood Principle - Don’t call us, we’ll call you. `  
Meaning: When you have high-level components depending on low-level components depending on high-level components depending on sideways components depending on low-level components, and so on `the dependency rot` happens, and when it sets in no one can easily understand the way a system is designed.  
    → With the Hollywood Principle, we allow low-level components to hook themselves into a system, but the high-level components determine when they are needed, and how. In other words, the high-level components give the low-level components a “don’t call us, we’ll call you” treatment.
